website/docs: add a new page to help people get started after install is complete (#19217)
goauthentik/authentik: website/docs/install-config/first_steps.mdx

architecture-beta
    group first

    service install(mdi:application-cog-outline)[Install authentik] in first
    service acl(mdi:account-key-outline)[Access authentik] in first
    service apps(mdi:plus-box-multiple-outline)[Add an appp and provider] in first
    service users(mdi:account-multiple-plus)[Create a new user] in first
    service further(mdi:cog-clockwise)[Further customization] in first

    install:R --> L:acl
    acl:R --> L:apps
    apps:R --> L:users
    users:R --> L:further

```

## Where are we now, and what's next?

The following tutorial assumes that you have already:

1. Installed authentik on either [Docker Compose](../install-config/install/docker-compose.mdx#install-and-start-authentik) or [Kubernetes](../install-config/install/kubernetes.md#install-authentik-helm-chart), and then started the server and worker.

2. Opened authentik in your browser and added credentials for a default Admin account. ([Docker](../install-config/install/docker-compose.mdx#access-authentik) or [Kubernetes](../install-config/install/kubernetes.md#access-authentik)).

:::info Initial setup in browser

> If your attempt to open authentik in the browser using the URL with the `initial-setup` flow does not work, verify that you have a trailing slash on the end of the URL. Also verify that Docker is running and that the authentik server and worker are started and healthy.

Reviewer: but you can't say docker, you need to generalize

- [Installed a production-ready PostgreSQL database](./install/kubernetes.md#postgresql-production-setup).
- [Configured your PostgreSQL settings](./configuration/configuration.mdx#postgresql-settings) (read-replica, connections, etc.).
- Configured your [media storage settings](../install-config/configuration/configuration.mdx#media-storage-settings) or optionally [AWS S3 file storage](../sys-mgmt/ops/storage-s3.md).
- Added additional [custom configurations environment variables](../configuration/#set-your-environment-variables).
- [Verified](../configuration/#verify-your-configuration-settings) your configuration settings.

## Install your first application and provider

Now that you have your authentik instance installed and configured with the required settings, you can add your first [application](../core/glossary/terms/application.mdx) and [provider](../core/glossary/terms/provider.mdx). After that, we'll walk through how to add users, groups, and roles.

authentik supports hundreds of applications; refer to our [Integrations documentation](https://integrations.goauthentik.io/index.mdx) to view integrations guides for many common ones.

<details>

>     <summary>We'll use the Grafana application as a first application.</summary>

Reviewer: ehhh not a fan of making a mini integration guide here that could be outdated and grafana is more than plug and play for most use cases. i would rm this entire block

    GF_AUTH_OAUTH_AUTO_LOGIN: "true"
    # Optionally map user groups to Grafana roles
    GF_AUTH_GENERIC_OAUTH_ROLE_ATTRIBUTE_PATH: "contains(groups[*], 'Grafana Admins') && 'Admin' || contains(groups[*], 'Grafana Editors') && 'Editor' || 'Viewer'"
    # Required if Grafana is running behind a reverse proxy
    GF_SERVER_ROOT_URL: "https://grafana.company"
```

**B.** Save your `.env` file and go to your Grafana application.

**C.** To confirm that authentik is properly configured with the new application, log out of the Grafana application and then log back in using your authetntik credentials. If you don't use the default admin account that's fine, just be sure that the account is for a member of an appropriate authentik group.

## Add your first user

Now that you can access the authentik Admin interface, and you have added an application and provider, let's add a new user.

### 1. Log in to authentik as an administrator and open the authentik Admin interface.

    **A.** Navigate to **Directory > Users**, and click **New User**.

    **B.** Fill in the **_required_** fields:

    - **Username**: This value must be unique across your user folders.

>     - **Path**: The path where the user will be created. By default the new user is created in the `/root/users` directory path, but you can change that later by editing the user.

Reviewer: Root > users is wayyyy different than /root/users plus you'd just set the path as `users`, no need to include root

    - **Attributes**: You can leave this empty for this tutorial. Custom attributes definition for the user, in YAML or JSON format. These attributes can be used to enforce additional prompts on authentication stages or define conditions to enforce specific policies if the current implementation does not fit your use case.

    **C.** Click **Create**.

### 2. Verify that the new user was created

- Look for the new user in the list on the **Directory > Users** page.

## What's next?

Now that you have added your first application, and a new user, here are some typical next steps:

- Assign your new user to appropriate [groups](../users-sources/user/user_basic_operations.md#add-a-user-to-a-group) and [roles](../users-sources/user/user_basic_operations.md#add-a-user-to-a-role).
- Configure federated or external [sources](../users-sources/sources/index.md) (an existing source of user credentials and other user data).
- Set up MFA
- Define [property mappings](../add-secure-apps/providers/property-mappings/index.md).
- Create a [custom flow](../add-secure-apps/flows-stages/flow/index.md#).
- Configure a [reverse proxy](./reverse-proxy.md).

> - Install an [Enterprise license](../enterprise/manage-enterprise.mdx#buy-a-license)

Reviewer: not sure a first steps guide is the best place to push towards ent

> - [Create a policy](../customize/policies/index.md) to control access or force MFA use.

Reviewer: policies can be used for much more, not really first steps either

Author: Sure, they can go read more is the idea

Review the following information to learn more about the basics of setting up authentik and for troubleshooting tips.

### Production environments

For production environments we recommend that you install and run authentik in [Kubernetes](../install-config/install/kubernetes.md).

### Modifying the Docker Compose file

Especially when you are just starting out with authentik, we recommend that you use the default `docker-compose.yml` file that comes with the download, instead of trying to write the file from scratch. After you have successfully installed, configured, and accessed authentik, you can edit the file to do more advanced configurations, as documented in the [Configuration section](../install-config/configuration/configuration.mdx).

### Reverse proxy

Typically authentik is set up with a reverse proxy in front of it. If you already have a reverse proxy that you are using to handle your incoming network traffic, you can simply use that same reverse proxy for authentik, by adding a few configuration values. There is no need to set up a separate reverse proxy. For more details see the [Reverse proxy guide](./reverse-proxy.md).

### The `latest` tag is deprecated

> We highly recommend that you do NOT use the `:latest` tag with container images because it can lead to unintentional updates and potentially broken setups. Instead, use a specific version tag for authentik instances' container images, such as `:2025.12`.

Reviewer: its first steps why mention something deprecated

Reviewer: bluntly, not on us. It's been deprecated for ages and if they follow our guide they see that :latest is not mentioned. if you follow and exterior guide and stumble on :latest, we shouldn't need to balance for that

Reviewer 2: Mentioning this makes a lot of sense. This guide is targeted at new users and new users are the ones that keep making the mistake.

```mermaid
%%{init: {'theme': 'base', 'themeVariables': { 'primaryColor': '#FD4B2D', 'primaryTextColor': '#000', 'primaryBorderColor': '#FD4B2D'}}}%%

architecture-beta
    group first

    service install(mdi:application-cog-outline)[Install authentik] in first
    service acl(mdi:account-key-outline)[Access authentik] in first
    service apps(mdi:plus-box-multiple-outline)[Add an appp and provider] in first
    service users(mdi:account-multiple-plus)[Create a new user] in first
    service further(mdi:cog-clockwise)[Further customization] in first

    install:R --> L:acl
    acl:R --> L:apps
    apps:R --> L:users
    users:R --> L:further

```

## Where are we now, and what's next?

The following tutorial assumes that you have already:

1. Installed authentik on either [Docker Compose](../install-config/install/docker-compose.mdx#install-and-start-authentik), [Kubernetes](../install-config/install/kubernetes.md#install-authentik-helm-chart), or [AWS CloudFormation](../install-config/install/aws.md) and then started the server and worker.

> 2. Opened authentik in your browser and added credentials for a default Admin account. ([Docker](../install-config/install/docker-compose.mdx#access-authentik) or [Kubernetes](../install-config/install/kubernetes.md#access-authentik)).

Reviewer: or cloudformation

:::info Initial setup in browser

> If your attempt to open authentik in the browser using the URL with the `initial-setup` flow does not work, verify that you have a trailing slash on the end of the URL. Also verify that the authentik server, worker, an PostgreSQL database are started and healthy.

Reviewer: the first bit of the sentence does not make sense

> If your attempt to open authentik in the browser using the URL with the `initial-setup` flow does not work, verify that you have a trailing slash on the end of the URL. Also verify that the authentik server, worker, an PostgreSQL database are started and healthy.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If your attempt to open authentik in the browser using the URL with the `initial-setup` flow does not work, verify that you have a trailing slash on the end of the URL. Also verify that the authentik server, worker, and PostgreSQL database are running and healthy.
```

:::

Other optional pre-installation configurations that you might have already completed include:

- [Configured your global email address](../email/#global-email-settings).
- [Installed a production-ready PostgreSQL database](./install/kubernetes.md#postgresql-production-setup).
- [Configured your PostgreSQL settings](./configuration/configuration.mdx#postgresql-settings) (read-replica, connections, etc.).
- Configured a [reverse proxy](./reverse-proxy.md).

> - Configured your [media storage settings](../install-config/configuration/configuration.mdx#media-storage-settings) or optionally [AWS S3 file storage](../sys-mgmt/ops/storage-s3.md).

Reviewer: For 90% of installations, you use the file backend which is by default without needing to change env vars, and S3 is done later or on initial setup for ent setups/ones that know they need it. but that's far from first steps in general.

- [Verified](../configuration/#verify-your-configuration-settings) your configuration settings.

## Install your first application and provider

Now that you have your authentik instance installed and configured with the required settings, you can add your first [application](../core/glossary/terms/application.mdx) and [provider](../core/glossary/terms/provider.mdx). After that, we'll walk through how to add you r first user.

:::tip Security Best Practice

In a production environment, best practice is to first [create a group](../users-sources/groups/manage_groups.mdx#create-a-group), then [create the user(s)](../users-sources/user/user_basic_operations.md#create-a-user), and then add the application; you can configure the application to have a binding to the group or user. The binding controls the access to the application (whether or not it is displayed on a user's My Apps page).

:::

authentik supports hundreds of applications; refer to our [Integrations documentation](https://integrations.goauthentik.io/index.mdx) to view integrations guides for many common ones.

<details>

>     <summary>We'll use the Grafana application as a first application.</summary>

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    <summary>We'll use Grafana as a first application.</summary>
```

For more configuration options and full details about integrating with Grafana, refer to our [full integration guide](https://integrations.goauthentik.io/monitoring/grafana/). The following steps require that you have [Grafana instance running in Docker](https://grafana.com/docs/grafana/latest/setup-grafana/configure-docker/), and that you can access the authentik Admin interface.

</details>

### 1. Log in to authentik as an administrator and open the authentik Admin interface.

>     **A.** In the Admin interface, navigate to **Applications** > **Applications** and click **Create with Provider** to create an application and provider pair.

Reviewer 2: I'm not sure about using A, B, C in this section. I think that it would be clear without this.

Alternatively we could just use numbers or subheadings

:::

```
environment:
    GF_AUTH_GENERIC_OAUTH_ENABLED: "true"
    GF_AUTH_GENERIC_OAUTH_NAME: "authentik"
    GF_AUTH_GENERIC_OAUTH_CLIENT_ID: "<Client ID from above>"
    GF_AUTH_GENERIC_OAUTH_CLIENT_SECRET: "<Client Secret from above>"
    GF_AUTH_GENERIC_OAUTH_SCOPES: "openid profile email"
    GF_AUTH_GENERIC_OAUTH_AUTH_URL: "https://authentik.company/application/o/authorize/"
    GF_AUTH_GENERIC_OAUTH_TOKEN_URL: "https://authentik.company/application/o/token/"
    GF_AUTH_GENERIC_OAUTH_API_URL: "https://authentik.company/application/o/userinfo/"
    GF_AUTH_SIGNOUT_REDIRECT_URL: "https://authentik.company/application/o/<application_slug>/end-session/"
    # Optionally enable auto-login (bypasses Grafana login screen)
    GF_AUTH_OAUTH_AUTO_LOGIN: "true"
    # Optionally map user groups to Grafana roles
    GF_AUTH_GENERIC_OAUTH_ROLE_ATTRIBUTE_PATH: "contains(groups[*], 'Grafana Admins') && 'Admin' || contains(groups[*], 'Grafana Editors') && 'Editor' || 'Viewer'"
    # Required if Grafana is running behind a reverse proxy
    GF_SERVER_ROOT_URL: "https://grafana.company"
```

> **B.** Save your authentik `.env` file and go to your Grafana application.

Reviewer: why would you save your authentik env? you don't modify anything there

> **B.** Save your authentik `.env` file and go to your Grafana application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
**B.** Save your Grafana Docker Compose file, then launch the stack and access Grafana via your browser at the configured URL.
```

> **C.** To confirm that authentik is properly configured with the new application, log out of the Grafana application and then log back in using your authetntik credentials. If you don't use the default admin account that's fine, just be sure that the account is for a member of an appropriate authentik group.

Reviewer: typo in authentik and you'd click this to actually use sso.

<img width="573" height="626" alt="Image" src="https://github.com/user-attachments/assets/e1f8688a-1715-40f7-b874-2b55149dc0e9" />

> ## Add your first user

Reviewer: Above says " If you don't use the default admin account that's fine" but we talk about creating users below, this and previous section should be inversed

Now that you can access the authentik Admin interface, and you have added an application and provider, let's add a new user.

> ### 1. Log in to authentik as an administrator and open the authentik Admin interface.

Reviewer: i wouldn't put this as a h3

    **A.** Navigate to **Directory > Users**, and click **New User**.

    **B.** Fill in the **_required_** fields:

    - **Username**: This value must be unique across your user folders.
    - **Path**: The path where the user will be created. By default the new user is created in the `/root/users` directory path, but you can change that later by editing the user.

    For information about the **_optional_** fields below, refer to our [documentation on managing users](../users-sources/user/user_basic_operations.md#create-a-user).

    - **Name**: The display name of the user.
    - **Email**: The email address of the user.
    - **Is active**: Define the newly created user account as active.

>     - **Attributes**: You can leave this empty for this tutorial. Custom attributes definition for the user, in YAML or JSON format. These attributes can be used to enforce additional prompts on authentication stages or define conditions to enforce specific policies if the current implementation does not fit your use case.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    - **Attributes**: You can leave this empty for this tutorial. This field can be used to store custom attributes for the user, in YAML or JSON format. These attributes can then be used within property mappings and policies.
```

    **C.** Click **Create**.

### 2. Verify that the new user was created

- Look for the new user in the list on the **Directory > Users** page.

## What's next?

Now that you have added your first application, and a new user, here are some typical next steps:

- Assign your new user to appropriate [groups](../users-sources/user/user_basic_operations.md#add-a-user-to-a-group) and [roles](../users-sources/user/user_basic_operations.md#add-a-user-to-a-role).
- Configure federated or external [sources](../users-sources/sources/index.md) (an existing source of user credentials and other user data).
- Set up MFA
- Define [property mappings](../add-secure-apps/providers/property-mappings/index.md).
- Create a [custom flow](../add-secure-apps/flows-stages/flow/index.md#).
- Install an [Enterprise license](../enterprise/manage-enterprise.mdx#buy-a-license)
- [Create a policy](../customize/policies/index.md) to control access or force MFA use.

## Things to know and troubleshooting tips

Review the following information to learn more about the basics of setting up authentik and for troubleshooting tips.

### Production environments

> For production environments we recommend that you install and run authentik in [Kubernetes](../install-config/install/kubernetes.md).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

We have plenty of customers that use docker in production. It depends on the use case. Not really possible to give a flat recommendation.
